migrate(eks): add tutorial of migrating node groups with zero downtime (#1327)
pulumi/docs: content/docs/reference/tutorials/kubernetes/tutorial-migrate-nodegroups.md

---

> title: "Clusters: EKS - Migrating Node Groups with Zero Downtime"

Author: Done

menu:
  reference:
    parent: tutorials-kubernetes
    weight: 3
---

In this tutorial we'll launch a new, managed Kubernetes cluster in Elastic

> Kubernetes Service (EKS) on AWS. Then, we'll walk through Day-2 operations for

Author: Done

Kubernetes to help you administer and update the cluster, and your workloads running on it.

> We'll showcase how to:

Author: Done

1. Create various worker node groups with different settings, such as instance types and AMIs.
1. Deploy a workload to the set of node groups: the [NGINX Ingress Controller][ingress-nginx], and a
simple [echoserver][echoserver] app that echo's client request headers.
1. Migrate NGINX from its original node group to a new, updated node
group with zero downtime to it or the echoserver during load testing.
1. And lastly, once migration has completed, we'll drain, delete, and remove the
original node group from Kubernetes and AWS.

> The code for this tutorial is available on [GitHub][example-gh].

Author: Done

<p align="center"><img src="/images/docs/reference/kubernetes/eks-update-nodegroups.svg" width="650"></p>

{{< aws-eks-prereqs >}}

## Table of Contents

- [Initialize the Pulumi Project](#initialize-the-pulumi-project)
- [Create an EKS Cluster & Deploy Workloads](#create-an-eks-cluster-deploy-workloads)
- [Access the Workloads](#access-the-workloads)

> - [...But First, Let's Talk About Resource Updates](#but-first-let-s-talk-about-resource-updates)

Author: All good 👍

  * [Pulumi's Approach: `create-before-delete`](#pulumi-s-approach-create-before-delete)
  * [Kubernetes Workloads: High-Availability (HA) & Rolling Updates](#kubernetes-workloads-high-availability-ha-rolling-updates)
- [The Great Migration](#the-great-migration)
  * [Step 0: Launch Load Tests](#step-0-launch-load-tests)
  * [Step 1: Creating the new `4xlarge` Node Group](#step-1-creating-the-new-4xlarge-node-group)
  * [Step 2: Retargeting NGINX at the `4xlarge` Node Group](#step-2-retargeting-nginx-at-the-4xlarge-node-group)
  * [Step 3: Decomissioning the `2xlarge` Node Group](#step-3-decomissioning-the-2xlarge-node-group)
- [Clean Up](#clean-up)
- [Summary](#summary)

## Initialize the Pulumi Project

> 1.  Start by cloning the [example][example-gh] to your local machine:

Author: These are named anchors for links. We tend to use them to help with readability instead of embedding a long URL or header anchor. It also helps create a ref to avoid dupe URL's from being typed many times.

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-eks

>     cd nodejs/eks/examples/migrate-nodegroups

Reviewer: Mind adding a `$` prefix in front of all these (applies throughout this doc)? We do that pretty consistently throughout the rest of the docs and there are even places in this doc that does it.

Also, the new "copy to clipboard" button will be smart about bash/shell lines prefixed with `$`... If these two lines were written as:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-eks
$ cd nodejs/eks/examples/migrate-nodegroups
```

And you click the copy button, the following will be written to the clipboard:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-eks && cd nodejs/eks/examples/migrate-nodegroups
```

If you had comments (starting with `#`) or lines that came after lines that are prefixed with `$ ` (e.g. command output), those won't be written to the clipboard.

Author: Done! PS This smart copy feature + the copy feature itself is a great add! 🎉 Thanks for the tip

    ```

> 1.  Install the dependencies:

Author: Done

    ```
    npm install
    ```

1.  Create a new Pulumi [stack][stack]:

    ```
    pulumi stack init update-nodegroups-dev
    ```

1. Set the Pulumi [configuration][pulumi-config] variables for the project:

    ```bash

>     // Any valid EKS region. AMIs used must match this region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Any valid EKS region. AMIs used must match this region.
```

    pulumi config set aws:region us-west-2
    ```

## Create an EKS Cluster & Deploy Workloads

Perform the cluster and workload deployment:

```bash
pulumi up
```

The update will create the following resources in AWS:

* A VPC in our region, with public & private subnets across all of the region's availability zones.
* The IAM Roles & Instance Profiles for each node group.
* An EKS cluster with `v1.13` of Kubernetes, with settings that include:
    * Private worker nodes
    * Resource tagging, and
    * Omission of the default node group in favor of our own managed worker
      node groups.

> * A standard `t2.medium` worker node group using the recent `v1.13.7` worker [AMI][eks-amis].

Author: Done

	-no pod information available-

Server values:
	server_version=nginx: 1.13.0 - lua: 10008

Request Information:
	client_address=172.16.247.199
	method=GET
	real path=/echoserver
	query=
	request_version=1.1
	request_uri=http://apps.example.com:8080/echoserver

Request Headers:
	accept=*/*
	host=apps.example.com
	user-agent=curl/7.58.0
	x-forwarded-for=172.16.200.230
	x-forwarded-host=apps.example.com
	x-forwarded-port=80
	x-forwarded-proto=http
	x-original-uri=/echoserver
	x-real-ip=172.16.200.230
	x-request-id=b874c43cc675d28c68a0c39069799b10
	x-scheme=http

Request Body:
	-no body in request-
```

With our apps now verified as working and accessible, we're ready to see how we
can leverage Kubernetes and Pulumi to update our worker node groups, and 
migrate our workloads.

## ...But First, Let's Talk About Resource Updates

### Pulumi's Approach: `create-before-delete`

Resources under management in Pulumi are [uniquely named][pulumi-urn] using a
Universal Resource Name (URN) to identify and track resources across program
deployments and state changes. Additionally, a [random postfix][pulumi-auto-naming] is added to
resource instantiations to avoid collisions, and to assist in

> zero-downtime replacements. This is achieved by using a **create-before-delete**

Author: `deleteBeforeReplace` is the opposite intent of create-before-delete. We actually do not have much public content on the topic of create-before-delete outside of our [auto-naming](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/programming-model/#autonaming) section.

We should probably open up an issue to add more on this topic in our programming model that borrows from this, which was pulled from PRs, docs, and conversations.

approach in the Pulumi programming model where:

> * First, the new version of the resource is created,

Author: Done

fine-tune the necessary resilience into the workload and its dependencies
to safely apply updates, and terminate as expected.

As you'll see shortly, we've taken the liberty of using the various
capabilities that Kubernetes offers for HA and rolling updates to support
migration of the NGINX Ingress Controller example.

We highly encourage you to check out the references below to help your
apps achieve proper Kubernetes and production readiness. 

#### References

- [Deployments][k8s-deployments]
- [PodDisruptionBudget][k8s-pdb]
- [Node Selectors & Affinity][k8s-node-affinity]
- [Pod Affinity & Anti-Affinity][k8s-pod-affinity]
- [Service Selectors][k8s-service]
- [Readiness & Liveness Probes][k8s-probes]
- [Lifecycle Hooks][k8s-hooks]
- [Termation Grace Period & Graceful Shutdown][k8s-graceful-shutdown]
- [Pod Termination Lifecycle][pod-lifecycle]
- [Zero-downtime Deployment in Kubernetes with Jenkins][k8s-jenkins]

## The Great Migration

Upon initial deployment of our workload stack, the `echoserver` will ultimately land
on the Standard node group we've created, given our lack of specificity
for where the Kubernetes scheduler should place it. The NGINX Ingress Controller

> instead, specifically targets the `2xlarge` node group given its heftier specs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
specifically targets the `2xlarge` node group instead, given its heftier specs.
```

Both scheduling choices were made with the intent of segmenting our workloads

> by use-case, and performance requirements we've identified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by use case, and performance requirements we've identified.
```

In our [inital update][initial-update] we selected that our EKS 
control plane run on `v1.13.7` of Kubernetes, that the Standard node group
use `v1.13.7` of the [EKS-optimized][eks-amis] worker AMIs, and that the
`2xlarge` node group use `v1.12.7` workers.

Since we do not want our `2xlarge` workers to drift too far apart from the control
plane's version to cause [unsupported skew][version-skew], and we
ultimately realize that the `2xlarge` node group may not suffice for a
large, anticipated request load, we've decided to update various settings of 
the node group for NGINX.

The node group that NGINX will select and target will go from:

>   * Using `v1.12.7`of Kubernetes, in a pool of (3) `t3.2xlarge` worker instances ->

Reviewer 2: If this `->` is meant to indicate from point A to B, these probably shouldn't be list items?

Author: Done

  * Using `v1.13.7`of Kubernetes, in a pool of (5) `c5.4xlarge` worker instances.

> We will also be using the [`hey`][hey-load-testing] load testing tool through

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will also be using the [`hey`][hey-load-testing] load testing tool throughout
```

out our migration to consistently hit the endpoint and path for the
`echoserver` behind NGINX to ensure we acheive zero-downtime.

### Step 0: Launch Load Tests

As we migrate NGINX from the `2xlarge` -> `4xlarge` node group, we'll kick off
a load testing script against the endpoint and path of the `echoserver` on our
cluster.

> You can install the [`hey`][hey-load-testing] load testing tool locally to your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can install the [`hey`][hey-load-testing] load testing tool locally on your
```

machine by doing the following:

```bash
go get -u github.com/rakyll/hey
```

Using the `LB` environment variable previously defined in the 
`pulumi stack output` for NGINX's AWS load balancer, and a helper script in
`./scripts`, we'll load test for many iterations of 50,000 requests, with 100

> concurrent requests at a time, e.g. run testing across 75 iterations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
concurrent requests at a time. For example, run testing across 75 iterations:
```

```bash
./scripts/load-testing.sh $LB 75
```

> **Note**: Given the large number of requests being generated during load

> > testing (millions), a seperate machine for testing would be best suited

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> testing (millions), a separate machine for testing would be best suited
```

for overall network performance and throughput on your client.

> ### Step 1: Creating the new `4xlarge` Node Group

Reviewer 2: I noticed this in many of our existing content, but we should probably start staying away from gerunds.

Author: Done

Next, we'll create a new node group in AWS using Pulumi for the `4xlarge` node
group. This is as simple as defining a new node group in our program:

<p align="center"><img src="/images/docs/reference/kubernetes/ng-4xlarge.svg" width="650"/></p>

You can make this change yourself in your `index.ts` by running the following: 

```bash
cp steps/step1/index.ts index.ts
pulumi up
```

> Once the update is complete, verify the new `c5.4xlarge` node group is up and running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the update is complete, verify that the new `c5.4xlarge` node group is up and running.
```

```bash
kubectl get nodes -o wide --show-labels -l beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type=c5.4xlarge
```

### Step 2: Retargeting NGINX at the `4xlarge` Node Group

Now, we'll retarget the NGINX Service away from the `2xlarge` node group over to the
`4xlarge` node group, by changing its node selector scheduling terms:

<p align="center"><img src="/images/docs/reference/kubernetes/target-ng-4xlarge.svg" width="650"/></p>

You can make this change yourself in your `index.ts` by running the following: 

```bash
cp steps/step2/index.ts index.ts
pulumi up
```

> > **Note:** Given that the termination process must gracefully shutdown, and process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Given that the termination process must gracefully shut down, and process
```

all in-flight requests, this may take a few minutes to complete.

Once the update is complete, verify the NGINX pods are now running in the new
`4xlarge` node group by retrieving its Pods, the `c5.4xlarge` nodes, and
noticing that the Pods are in fact running on updated nodes.

```bash
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -o wide --show-labels -l app=nginx-ing-cntlr
kubectl get nodes -o wide --show-labels -l beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type=c5.4xlarge
```

> You should also notice a linear up-tick in **requests per second** in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should also notice a linear uptick in **requests per second** in the
```

load testing results, due to the more capable `c5.4xlarge` worker instances
being used.

### Step 3: Decomissioning the `2xlarge` Node Group

With NGINX validated to be up and running on the `4xlarge` node group, we can

> now commence the decomissioning of the original `2xlarge` node group no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
now commence the decommissioning of the original `2xlarge` node group that is no
```

longer in use.

First, we'll instruct the Kubernetes APIServer to drain the `2xlarge` node group using
`kubectl drain`. We've added a helper script to facilitate this process:

```bash
./scripts/drain-t3.2xlarge-nodes.sh
```

Once draining is complete, let's instruct the Kubernetes APIServer to delete
and remove the nodes from the cluster using `kubectl delete node`:

```bash
./scripts/delete-t3.2xlarge-nodes.sh
```

After node deletion from the cluster has completed, and we've verified that the
instances backing our load balancer are up-to-date and no longer include the
`2xlarge` node group, we can remove its definition from our Pulumi program:

<p align="center"><img src="/images/docs/reference/kubernetes/remove-ng-2xlarge.svg" width="650"/></p>

You can make this change yourself in your `index.ts` by running the following: 

```bash
cp steps/step3/index.ts index.ts
pulumi up
```

> If we've executed all of the steps as follows, then we'll have successfully migrated

Reviewer 2: Should it be "If you've executed all of the previous steps"

Author: Done

NGINX from the `2xlarge` node group to the `4xlarge` group with

> zero downtime to it or the `echoserver`, and removed the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
zero downtime for both NGINX and the `echoserver`, and removed the
```

`2xlarge` node group completely from Kubernetes and AWS.

We can also verify the load testing results to validate that our requests have all 

> returned with `HTTP 200` status codes through out the entire migration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
returned with `HTTP 200` status codes throughout the entire migration
```

process.

## Clean Up

Run the following command to tear down the resources that are part of our stack.

> 1.  Run `pulumi destroy` to tear down all resources.  You'll be prompted to make sure you really want to delete these resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Run `pulumi destroy` to tear down all resources.  You'll be prompted to confirm that you really want to delete these resources.
```

1.  To delete the stack itself, run `pulumi stack rm`. Note that this command deletes all deployment history from the Pulumi Console and cannot be undone.

## Summary

> In this tutorial, we saw how to use Pulumi to launch a managed Kubernetes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we saw how to use Pulumi for launching a managed Kubernetes 
```

cluster on AWS EKS with active workloads. Then, we performed a migration
of the apps and underlying cloud provider resources over to new, updated
resources with zero downtime.

Leveraging Kubernetes control plane with Pulumi's Infrastrcture-as-Code (IaC)
semantics allows us to administer over many kinds of update scenarios with
ease. This provides the ability to manage clusters with real code that can
be tracked in version control systems, and deployed as a series of
Pulumi updates through CI/CD.

For a follow-up example on how to further use Pulumi to create Kubernetes
clusters, or deploy workloads to a cluster, check out the rest of the
[Kubernetes tutorials]({{< relref "/docs/reference/tutorials/kubernetes" >}}).

[example-gh]: https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-eks/tree/master/nodejs/eks/examples/migrate-nodegroups

> [stack]: https://pulumi.io/reference/stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[stack]: {{< relref "/docs/reference/stack.md" >}}
```

[eks-amis]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-ami.html
[ingress-nginx]: https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx
[echoserver]: https://github.com/kubernetes-retired/contrib/blob/master/ingress/echoheaders/echo-app.yaml

> [stack-outputs]: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/programming-model#stack-outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[stack-outputs]: {{< relref "/docs/reference/programming-model.md#stack-outputs" >}}
```

> [pulumi-config]: https://pulumi.io/reference/config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pulumi-config]: {{< relref "/docs/reference/config.md" >}}
```

[statefulsets]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset
[k8s-deployments]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/#updating-a-deployment
[k8s-pdb]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb
[k8s-node-affinity]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity
[k8s-pod-affinity]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/assign-pod-node/#inter-pod-affinity-and-anti-affinity-beta-feature
[k8s-service]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#defining-a-service
[k8s-probes]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-probes
[k8s-hooks]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/container-lifecycle-hooks
[k8s-graceful-shutdown]: https://pracucci.com/graceful-shutdown-of-kubernetes-pods.html
[k8s-jenkins]: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2018/04/30/zero-downtime-deployment-kubernetes-jenkins
[eks-amis]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-ami.html
[version-skew]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/release/version-skew-policy/#supported-version-skew

> [pulumi-urn]: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/programming-model/#urns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pulumi-auto-naming]: {{< relref "/docs/reference/programming-model.md#urns" >}}
```

> [pulumi-auto-naming]: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/programming-model/#autonaming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pulumi-auto-naming]: {{< relref "/docs/reference/programming-model.md#autonaming" >}}
```
